.TH FIZMO-CONSOLE 6 "March 9, 2012" "0.7.2"
.SH NAME
fizmo-console
- bare-bone console implementation of the fizmo Z-Maschine Interpreter.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fizmo-console
[ options ]
.I storyfile

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fizmo-console
is a frontend for the fizmo Z-Machine interpreter\[em]\[lq]\fBF\fPimzo
\fBi\fPnterprets \fBZ\fP-\fBm\fPachine \fBo\fPpcodes\[rq]\[em]which uses
only the basic console output and input methods. It will run most of the
interactive fiction games aka text adventures written by Infocom or other
games which are based on the Z-Machine\[em]currently all versions except
version 6 are supported.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -h, --help
Show help message and exit.
.TP
.B -ll, --line-length
Will set the line length for the current screen. This will enable word-wrapping
using the defined screen size.
.TP
.B -dh, --disable-hyphenation
Disable word hyphenation. Useful for languages other than the supported
ones.

.SH CREDITS
.SS ITF \[em] The InfoTaskForce
All the people who drew up the Z-Machine Specification, in alphabetical order:
Chris Tham,
David Beazley,
George Janczuk,
Graham Nelson,
Mark Howell,
Matthias Pfaller,
Mike Threepoint,
Paul David Doherty,
Peter Lisle,
Russell Hoare
and
Stefan Jokisch.
See \fChttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InfoTaskForce\fP for more information.
.SS The Frotz authors
When I really got stuck I peeked into the frotz source. Thanks to
Stefan Jokisch,
Galen Hazelwood
and
David Griffith.
.SS People helping with bug fixes, extensions, packaging, translations and more
in alphabetical order:
Andrew Plotkin,
David Leverton,
Eric Forgeot,
irb,
Lewis Gentry,
Michael Dunlap,
Pattrick Matth\(:ai,
Samuel Verschelde, 
Zachary Kline
and the people at MacPorts.


.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fizmo-ncursesw(6),
.BR frotz(6),
.BR xzip(6),
.BR jzip(6),
.BR inform(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Fizmo was written in 2005\[en]2012 by Christoph Ender.

.SH BUGS
Fizmo is in beta stage and will probably still have some bugs.
If you stumble upon one, please send an e-mail to fizmo@spellbreaker.org.

