.TH FIZMO-NCURSESW 6 "6 November 2011" "0.7.1"
.SH NAME
fizmo-ncursesw
- wide-character-ncurses implementation of the fizmo Z-Machine Interpreter.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fizmo-ncursesw
[ options ] [
.I storyfile [ blorbfile ]
|
.I storytitle
|
.I quetzal-save-file
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fizmo-ncursesw
is a frontend for the fizmo Z-Machine interpreter\[em]\[lq]\fBF\fPimzo
\fBi\fPnterprets \fBZ\fP-\fBm\fPachine \fBo\fPpcodes\[rq]\[em]based on the
ncurses library, and supporting wide characters. It runs most
of the interactive fiction games aka text adventures written by Infocom or
other games which are based on the Z-Machine. Currently all versions
except version 6 are supported. It also supports sound via the SDL media
library\[em]see subsection \[lq]Sound Support\[rq]\[em]and implements basic
Blorb support.
.SS Starting a new game by providing a filename
This is the most direct way to get a game running. Just give the filename
of the story file at the end of the command line.
.SS Starting a new game by providing it's title
If the game you want to play is stored in the list of known games, you can
simply start it by providing the title instead of the full filename.
Example: "fizmo sorcerer" will run the game \[lq]Sorcerer\[rq], no matter if
it is stored in the current directory or somewhere else.
.SS Starting a game from the list of story files
Without any filename given, fizmo will display the list of the currently
known story files it has indexed so far. Everytime fizmo is started and no
story-name is provided, fizmo will update the list of stories by indexing
the directories listed in \fCZCODE_PATH\fP or \fCINFOCOM_PATH\fP.
.SS Restoring a game from the command line
If you give the name of a quetzal save-game file at the end of the command
line, fizmo will use it's story file list to locate the story file the
saved game originates from to directly restore the game.

.SS Sound Support
fizmo-ncursesw supports sound via the SDL multimedia library which is available
for most unix flavors and Windows. Sound files are either read from a blorb
file, or, old-infocom-style-wise, from separate *.snd files which have to be
stored in the same directory as the game file. At the moment, only AIFF sounds
can be read from a blorb file.
When the game requests a sound, fizmo uses the sound from the current blorb
file. If no blorb file is given or the sound cannot be found in it, fizmo
tries to locate a file with the format \[lq]GAMFIL00.SND\[rq] where GAMEFIL
symbolizes the game filename shortened to a maximum of six characters, the
sound number\[em]eventually padded by a leading zero so it has always a
length of two characters\[em]and a \[lq].SND\[rq] suffix. Both upper-
and lowercase filenames are attempted. That means you can directly use the
sounds from the IF-archive at \fC\[lq]/if-archive/infocom/media/sound\[rq]\fP.

.SS Story-Metadata / IF Bibliography
fizmo-ncursesw is able to read metadata-files as defined in the \[lq]Treaty of
Babel\[rq]. It will try to read the metadata from all files ending in
\fC.iFiction\fP which are found in the \fC$HOME/.config/fizmo\fP directory.
Fizmo will re-build the story list once the metadata files have been changed.
For this purpose, the timestamps for the metadata-files are stored in the file
\fC$HOME/.config/fizmo/babel-timestamps\fP.
For more information about the treaty, see
\fChttp://babel.ifarchive.org/\fP.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -h, --help
Show help message and exit.
.TP
.B -b, --background-color \fI<color-name>\fP
Set background color. Valid color names are \fIblack\fP, \fIred\fP,
\fIgreen\fP, \fIyellow\fP, \fIblue\fP, \fImagenta\fP, \fIcyan\fP and
\fIwhite\fP.
.TP
.B -dh, --disable-hyphenation
Disable word hyphenation. Useful for languages other than the supported
ones.
.TP
.B -ds, --disable-sound
Disable sound alltogether. May be useful when playing on remote machines.
.TP
.B -ec, --enable-colors
Enable colors.
.TP
.B -f, --foreground-color \fI<color-name>\fP
Set foreground color. Valid color names are \fIblack\fP, \fIred\fP,
\fIgreen\fP, \fIyellow\fP, \fIblue\fP, \fImagenta\fP, \fIcyan\fP and
\fIwhite\fP.
.TP
.B -fi, --start-file-input
Start game with input from file.
.TP
.B -if, --input-file
Filename to read commands from.
.TP
.B -l, --set-locale \fI<locale-code>\fP
Set locale name for interpreter messages. Currently valid locale codes are
\fIen_US\fP, \fIde_DE\fP and \fIfr_FR\fP.
.TP
.B -lm, --left-margin \fI<width>\fP
Set left margin width, requires a numeric argument.
.TP
.B -nc, --dont-use-colors
Don't use colors.
.TP
.B -nu, --dont-update-story-list
Don't update story-list on startup. Useful in case you've got a large
number of story files in your repository.
.TP
.B -nx, --disable-x11-graphics
Disable X11 graphics.
.TP
.B -pr, --predictable
Start with random generator in predictable mode.
.TP
.B -ra, --random
Start with random generator in standard random mode.
.TP
.B -rc, --record-commands
Activate recording of commands as soon as the game starts.
.TP
.B -rf, --record-filename
Filename to record input to.
.TP
.B -rm, --right-margin \fI<width>\fP
Set right margin width, requires a numeric argument.
.TP
.B -rs, --recursively-search \fI<directory-name>\fP
Search a directory recursively, meaning including subdirectories, for
Z-Machine files.
.TP
.B -s, --search \fI<directory-name>\fP
Search a single directory for Z-Machine files.
.TP
.B -s8, --force-8bit-sound
Never use 16-bit resolution, always convert to 8bit (some systems may not
be capable of 16-bit sound output).
.TP
.B -st, --start-transcript
Start game with scripting already enabled.
.TP
.B -sy, --sync-transcript
When a transcript is active, write data directly into the file as soon
as possible.
.TP
.B -t, --set-tandy-flag
Sets the tandy flag, which emulates a game sold by the Tandy Corporation
and slightly alters the game behaviour. See
\fChttp://www.ifarchive.org/if-archive/infocom/info/tandy_bits.html\fP
for detailed information on what the tandy flag does.
.TP
.B -tf, --transcript-filename
Set transcript filename for the current session.
.TP
.B -u,  --update-story-list
In case you have disabled automatic updates for your story list, this
option will allow you to run the re-indexing manually.
.TP
.B -um, --umem
Use UMem instead of CMem for saving.
.TP
.B -xi, -enable-x11-inline-graphics
Enable XTerm graphics. This will make fizmo try to display graphics into
a X-Terminal. Since this represents a rather ugly hack\[em]and may not
work at all for some installations\[em]it is not enabled by default.
.TP
.B -xt, --enable-xterm-title
Use the XTerminal title bar to display the game name.

.SH IN-GAME COMMANDS
.TP
.B /help
Displays the list of available in-game commands.
.TP
.B /info
Displays general version about the interpreter and it's status, such as the
version number, story release and serial number, stack, memory and random
generator status.
.TP
.B /config
Displays current configuration values.
.TP
.B /predictable
Switches the random generator from \[lq]random\[rq] in \[lq]predictable\[rq]
state and vice-versa.
.TP
.B /recstart
Records all user input in a command-file.
.TP
.B /recstop
Stop recording user input.
.TP
.B /fileinput
Start reading commands from a file.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fC ZCODE_PATH
Default list of path names\[em]separated by colons\[em]to search for Z-Machine
games.
.TP
\fC INFOCOM_PATH
Alternate list of pathnames which is used when \fCZCODE_PATH\fP is not set.
.TP
\fC ZCODE_ROOT_PATH
List of colon-separated path names which are recursively searched for
Z-Machine games.

.SH FILES
.SS List of files
.TP
\fC$HOME/.config/fizmo/config\fP
May contain user configuration parameters. In case \fC$XDG_CONFIG_HOME\fP is
defined and contains an absolute path, \fC$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/fizmo/config\fP is
used, in case of a relative path \fC$HOME/$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/fizmo/confg\fP is
read.
.TP
\fC($XDG_CONFIG_DIRS)/fizmo/config\fP
$XDG_CONFIG_DIRS may contain a colon separated list of config directories to
search. In case $XDG_CONFIG_DIRS is not set or empty \fC/etc/xdg\fP is
used instead. Every directory is searched for a subdirectory named \fCfizmo\fP
containing a file \fCconfig\fP, which will be searched for configuration
parameters.
.TP
\fC/etc/fizmo.conf\fP
Global configuration parameters.
.TP
\fC$HOME/.config/fizmo/story\-list.txt\fP
Contains the current list of story files known. In case $XDG_CONFIG_HOME is
set the path is altered as described above.
.TP
\fC$HOME/.config/fizmo/*.iFiction\fP
Fizmo treats all files with a suffix of \fC.iFiction\fP in the
\fC$HOME/.config/fizmo\fP directory as sources for story metadata. For more
info, see section \[lq]Story-Metadata / IF Bibliography\[rq] above. In case
$XDG_CONFIG_HOME is defined, see above.
.TP
\fC$HOME/.config/fizmo/babel\-timestamps\fP
A list of .iFiction-files and their respective timestamps as they were found
when the story list was last built (knowing if the babel info has changed
speeds up the update process). $XDG_CONFIG_HOME will alter the directory
as described before.
.SS Option names for config files
The following section lists the config-file's equivalents for the command
lines options. For a detailed description of these options, see the
\[lq]Options\[rq] section. Options have to start at the beginning of the
line without any leading whitespace. Comments start with a '#' at the
beginning of the line.

background-color = <color-name>
.br
foreground-color = <color-name>
.br
transscript-filename = <filename>
.br
command-filename = <filename>
.br
i18n-search-path = <colon-separated-directory-names>
.br
locale = <language-code>
.br
savegame-path = <directory-name>
.br
random-mode = <random or predictable>
.br
save-text-history-paragraphs = <number of paragraphs to store in savegames>
.br
z-code-path = <colon-separated-directory-names>
.br
z-code-root-path = <colon-separated-directory-names>
.br
disable-sound = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes, otherwise no>
.br
quetzal-umem = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes, otherwise no>
.br
set-tandy-flag = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes, otherwise no>
.br
start-command-recording-when-story-starts = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means
yes, otherwise no>
.br
start-file-input-when-story-starts = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes,
otherwise no>
.br
start-script-when-story-starts = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes,
otherwise no>
.br
disable-stream-2-hyphenation = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes, otherwise no>
.br
stream-2-line-width = <line-width>
.br
stream-2-left-margin = <margin-size>
.br
sync-transcript = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes, otherwise no>
.br
left-margin = <number-of-columns>
.br
right-margin = <number-of-columns>
.br
disable-hyphenation = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes, otherwise no>
.br
disable-color = <any value means yes, empty no>
.br
force-8bit-sound = <any value means yes, empty no>
.br
enable-xterm-title = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes, otherwise no>
.br
dont-udpate-story-list = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes, otherwise no>
.br
enable-xterm-graphics = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes, otherwise no>
.br
display-x11-inline-image = <no value or \[lq]true\[rq] means yes, otherwise no>

.SH MISCELLANEOUS
.SS Scrolling back
You can use the \fCPageUp\fP and \fCPageDown\fP keys (some terminals may
require holding down shift) anytime to review text which was scrolled above
the current window border.
.SS Refreshing the screen
\fCCTRL-L\fP will redraw the current display.
.SS Resizing the screen
In general, resizing the screen works best for game versions 3 and before,
which is unfortunate since this encompasses only a part of the old Infocom
games and none of the modern ones. For all others\[em]including
Seastalker\[em]the upper window (which means mostly the status bar) cannot
be resized and will remain fixed.
.SS Undocumented Infocom commands
Here is a list of commands that some of Infocom's games seem to support,
although I never saw them menitioned in a manual or reference card.
.TP
\fC$verify, $ve, $ver\fP
Verifies if the game file is correct (essentially executes the
\[lq]verify\[rq] opcode). \[lq]$ve\[rq] works in almost all original Infocom
games, \[lq]$ver\[rq] works in AMFV, Beyond Zork, Bureaucracy, Nord
and Bert, Sherlock, Trinity and Zork Zero.
.TP
\fC$refre\fP
Refreshes the screen. Works in AMFV, Arthur, Bureaucracy, Nord and Bert,
Sherlock, Shogun, Trinity and Zork Zero.
.TP
\fC$id\fP
The \[lq]$id\[rq] command gives information about the interpreter. Works in
Border Zone, Bureaucracy and Trinity.
.TP
\fC$credi\fP
Shows a credit screen in Trinity and Beyond Zork.
.TP
\fC#comm, #command\fP
This will read your input from a file. Works in AMFV, Ballyhoo,
Bureaucracy, Enchanter, Hollywood Hjinx, Leather Goddesses, Lurking Horror,
Plundered Hearts, Shogun, Sorcerer, Spellbreaker, Stationfall, Trinity
and Zork Zero.
.TP
\fC#rand <int>\fP
Seeds the random generator with the given value. May be used in AMFV,
Ballyhoo, Border Zone, Bureaucracy, Enchanter, Hollywood Hijinx,
Leather Goddesses, Lurking Horror, Plundered Hearts, Shogun, Sorcerer,
Spellbreaker, Stationfall and Zork Zero.
.TP
\fC#reco, #record\fP
This will record your commands into a file. Works in AMFV, Ballyhoo,
Bureaucracy, Enchanter, Hollywood Hjinx, Leather Goddesses, Lurking Horror,
Plundered Hearts, Shogun, Sorcerer, Spellbreaker, Stationfall and Zork Zero.
.TP
\fC#unre, #unrecord\fP
Stops recording commands into a file. Used in AMFV, Ballyhoo, Bureaucracy,
Enchanter, Hollywood Hijinx, Leather Goddesses, Lurking Horror, Plundered
Hearts, Shogun, Sorcerer, Spellbreaker, Stationfall and Zork Zero.

.SH CREDITS
.SS ITF \[em] The InfoTaskForce
All the people who drew up the Z-Machine Specification, in alphabetical order:
Chris Tham,
David Beazley,
George Janczuk,
Graham Nelson,
Mark Howell,
Matthias Pfaller,
Mike Threepoint,
Paul David Doherty,
Peter Lisle,
Russell Hoare
and
Stefan Jokisch.
See \fChttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/InfoTaskForce\fP for more information.
.SS The Frotz authors
When I got stuck I peeked into the frotz source. Thanks to
Stefan Jokisch,
Galen Hazelwood
and
David Griffith.
.SS Mark Howell
For the pix2gif code which is used in libdrilbo to parse the infocom .mg1
image files.
.SS People helping with bug fixes, extensions, packaging, translations and more
in alphabetical order:
Andrew Plotkin,
David Leverton,
Eric Forgeot,
irb,
Lewis Gentry,
Michael Dunlap,
Pattrick Matth\(:ai,
Samuel Verschelde, 
Zachary Kline
and the people at MacPorts.


.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fizmo-console(6),
.BR frotz(6),
.BR xzip(6),
.BR jzip(6),
.BR inform(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Fizmo was written in 2005\[en]2011 by Christoph Ender.

.SH BUGS
Fizmo is in beta stage and will probably still have some bugs.
If you stumble upon one, please send an e-mail to fizmo@spellbreaker.org.

